when I read something like a novel by
Dostoevsky I think well is this true and
the answer is well those precise events
never happened so on that basis it's not
true but then there's something wrong
with that description because the
characterizations in Dostoevsky are so
true that in some sense they've never
been surpassed I do believe that the
stories in scripture happen but I don't
believe that the people who recorded
them had to do it in a way that accounts
for our our forensic uh nature let's say
I think that they're doing it in a
manner to show this very pattern in the
story of what it is that that was
happening in the world if you're going
to be a believer
you have to be able to say
in the words of the Creed that that you
believe that you believe in the Virgin
birth but do you believe most
importantly in the resurrection many of
us can walk 99 of the way there in terms
of belief in the in the in the truth of
the story or as betjamin puts it but is
it true is it true and then stumble on
the last thing
[Music]
hello everyone watching and listening
I'm very excited today to bring to you
two of my favorite people I would say
Douglas Murray and Jonathan pajo
I wanted to bring the three of us
together to talk about the underlying
metaphysical and Theological substrate
if any that constitutes the precondition
for classic conservatism small ill
liberalism and maybe Enlightenment
rationality as well as
let's say classic Western religious
belief which is sort of obviously linked
to that underlying metaphysic or maybe
the substrate for it I got interested in
talking to Douglas about this because
we've been talking over a couple of
years and he's become more convinced I
suppose or at least curious about the
relationship between
pure rationality and an ethic that might
be associated with pure Enlightenment
rationality and the relationship between
that and an underlying substrate of
fiction or narrative or perhaps
religious belief and I couldn't think of
anybody better to talk about that with
than Jonathan pagio I've been speaking
with Jonathan many times particularly
with John vervaki or at least
occasionally with John vervacci who's a
cognitive scientist who's also
interested in the same things and so I
thought we'd have a chance today to
delve deeply into the bottom of things
on the political and conceptual and
philosophical front and so I'll start
with the brief bio both of Mr Murray and
Mr pajo and then I'll ask Douglas about
his comments and his thinking on this
front because I know to some degree his
thinking has started to shift and change
so maybe he can outline what he did
think and what he now thinks and then
we'll enter into a uh a follow-up
conversation Douglas cure Murray is a
British author and political commentator
Mr Murray is associate editor of the
conservative leaning British political
and cultural magazine The Spectator and
the author of many books including most
recently the strange death of Europe
2017 The Madness of crowds gender race
and identity
2019 and the war on the west 2022.
Jonathan pajo is a Canadian religious
scholar podcaster and fine artist
specializing in Christian Orthodox
iconography he was a participant in a
recent Exodus seminar that I hosted in
Miami accompanied by a number of other
theologians the first half of which
comprising eight sessions will be
released November 26 2022 he is also
filming a set of introductory
commentaries for the forthcoming
re-release of my lectures on Genesis
so well welcome gentlemen it's a
pleasure to be able to introduce the
both of you and Douglas maybe I'll get
you to open I remembered and I was
struck by the comments that you made I
believe when you were talking to Dave
Rubin about the transformation of your
thoughts in relationship to religious
conceptualization and your insistence or
your realization or your speculation
that something like a fictional
metaphysic or
is a necessary precondition for the
stabilization of more rational World
Views including conservative liberal and
perhaps scientific and so hopefully I'm
not putting words in your mouth I I hope
I derived the right uh gist and
conclusion from your comments and so
um I'd I'd be happy to hear what you
have to say about all that
first of all it's a great pleasure to be
with you both and particularly to meet
Jonathan for the first time
um I don't know if there's been a shift
in the last few years in my thinking but
certainly in the last 15 years or so um
there's no doubt about that
um I was brought up a Christian and
indeed in adulthood was a believing
Christian into my late twenties
as is I think sometimes quite common uh
I fell into atheism being I am a
non-believer in my I suppose late
twenties and there were lots of reasons
for that we could get into but
um I was very much a sort of part of
that minor part of that new atheism
movement in the 2000s and uh I suppose I
had a period in which I thought
um that that was enough
uh and through the years that followed
that I suppose I had some of the Zeal of
the convert as it were that can happen
with atheists as much as it can happen
with the religious
um with a Zeal of the convert once that
sort of fell away a bit uh I was left
with the same questions that that I was
before with perhaps a less dogmatic tone
um and I suppose one of the things that
that was on my mind increasingly in the
2010s was
um that question of what's often been is
many people are credited with the
thought but uh the the German jurist
bochenford
Ernest Wolfgang back and forth is
usually regarded as having done it most
epigrammatically which is to pose the
question uh uh can a society uh that
continue to survive in its form if it
has cut itself off from the things that
gave it birth
in other words
um if you like Western societies if you
like societies like Britain America and
elsewhere
um there are several directions you can
go in one is to pretend that these
societies owe nothing to Christianity of
the judeo-christian tradition which is
is
um something that is attempted as a
claim by some people I think it's uh
obviously risible
um once you accept that the Christian
Tradition at least gave a very
significant amount at least was an
incredibly important strand of our
societies and what we treasure and
cherish in our societies today we would
not treasure or cherish if we didn't
have that inheritance once you accept
that then there's this question of
is that Society you have able to sustain
itself are the things you love able to
sustain themselves and be replenished
without reference the thing that gave
them birth
um put it another way uh let's say we're
sitting on a branch does the branch
remain up if the roots of the tree are
not nurtured and that putting it that
way of course makes the answer rather
obvious which is
um well obviously not I mean if you use
the branch of the tree analogy obviously
that doesn't work that's like soaring
off the branch that you're sitting on
but then that pose is a further question
and I I addressed this a bit in the book
you referred to there um Jordan the
strange death of Europe there are a
number of chapters I I use in that book
which is about movement of peoples in
the 21st century the ease of movement
migration and many other difficult
questions but the part of the book which
at least
um I I think is the most significant in
my if I say to myself is is the portion
on what I describe as a state of of
Western man's belief in the 21st century
um that we the the history has happened
discoveries have happened
biblical criticism has happened Darwin
has happened science has happened
discoveries have happened the the uh
um the the the the the the the the
way in which we used to explain things
we didn't know by putting God in there
has increasingly been narrowed so that
increasingly we know through science and
discoveries
how are certain things in our universe
happen how certain things in our bodies
happen and and the role of God
diminished and diminished but that as I
explained it in a strange death of
Europe that we we are in this
and I myself am in this uncomfortable
position because of course if you
believe that what you and recognize that
what you love and uh want to sustain is
in is a very significant part from this
particular route
um what do you do uh various theologians
albeit perhaps heretical theologians um
uh like Don Cupid and Richard Holloway
have also asked this question but it's a
it's a difficult and I admit frustrating
position to be in the one that I hold
because
um in part and I think Jordan you
yourself have experienced this in part
it's frustrating because Christians say
well therefore why don't you just
believe
and and that's not as straightforward as
those Christians seem to think they seem
to think well we've got you in a corner
by you recognizing
what you owe to the religion
so therefore make the final leap
[Music]
government continues to spend borrowed
money inflation continues to swell
dragging down our economy and the stock
market has entered bear territory so
what's your plan are your assets
Diversified I'm Phillip Patrick precious
metal specialist for the Birch gold
group for nearly 20 years we've helped
Americans diversify into gold and we can
help you too did you know you can own
physical gold and silver in a tax
sheltered account we can help you
transfer an IRA or 401K tied to stocks
into an IRA in Gold if you're skeptical
about the trajectory of the economy in
the US dollar then text Jordan to 989898
Birch gold group will send you a free
info kit on securing your savings with
gold with thousands of satisfied
customers five star reviews and an A
plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau we take Precious Metals seriously
text Jordan to 989898 for your free info
kit
yeah well the question then becomes what
what is that leap so let me offer you a
proposition here and you tell me what
you think about this and then maybe
Jonathan can chime in so
you know that the battle between the
atheist rationalist materialists let's
say and the religious types if it's
played out on the Battleground set by
The Atheist materialists is a battle
between the claims that the scientific
mode of explanation and the religious
mode of explanation are alike in kind
but different in conclusion and so that
you have a description of the world
where God's a causal agent and you have
a description of the world where natural
processes or causal agents and the
scientists tend to win that battle but
then I think well there's a problem with
that because it isn't obvious to me at
all that the way that God is
conceptualized in the judeo-christian
tradition and maybe more universally is
as
like like a a an analog of a material
cause if I look through the biblical
Canon and the way that God is
characterized uh as a character let's
say in some sense as a fictional
character and and I'll return to that
idea
his his uh his Essence is something more
like role model and spirit to emulate
it's a it's a it's something like a mode
of being it's it's an enacted motive
being in the world rather than a uh
then then a pure causal agent and the
problem with the scientific Endeavor is
that as Hume so famously pointed out
there's a huge gap between is and ought
and what I see offered on the religious
front is an answer to the question of
ought and then I'll add one more thing
to that so this is how you ought to
behave but not only to behave but how
you ought to perceive how you ought to
ought to make a hierarchy of your
attentional resources so that you're
looking at the right thing and acting in
the right way toward the proper goals
all the time how do you want yourself to
do that and so
that and I don't think that the first of
all the atheist types can't respond to
that because there's no way that they
can produce an ethic on the fly in some
sense and that was hume's right
objection and uh
and it also
thinking about the problem this way see
it also opens the door to a deeper
understanding of the role that fiction
and mythology play because you can think
of fiction including mythology as a form
of abstraction that characterizes
patterns of behavior and action rather
than a form of abstraction that
describes the world the way science does
and that way fiction becomes a different
kind of Truth which is a pragmatic truth
rather than a descriptive or
propositional truth and it's oriented
towards ethics and the direction of
attention and so I'm increasingly
thinking about the Heavenly hierarchy as
a internal in some sense psychological
structure through which we see the world
and I'll add one more thing to that turn
it over to Jonathan the other thing that
strikes me as psychologically
unassailable
is the fact that you need a uniting
principle
to orient your perceptions and actions
toward for two reasons two fundamental
reasons three fundamental reasons one is
if you're aiming towards something
valuable that gives you positive emotion
and hope and so all the motivation that
goes along with that fills you with
enthusiasm second if you don't have a
uniting ethic that governs your own
perceptions and actions then you're
confused and in disarray
and the cons the cost of that is anxiety
and hopelessness and pain and
frustration and disappointment and grief
all of the negative emotions and then
third if you don't have a uniting ethic
and so that has to be United under
something like a monotheistic
superordinate entity if you don't have
that then you have social disarray
because there's nothing that unites
people in their common ethical Pursuit
and that's their behavior and their
perceptions and so I'll let Jonathan
comment on that a bit if no I think what
you're saying is right on track that is
one of the problems that happened in the
story of Christianity is something like
the Enlightenment and modernism which is
that as the world was moving towards
this notion of mechanical causation and
the interest in mechanical causation
there would there be came to be a
misunderstanding of the way that
traditional Christians believe the world
actually existed and so there's a
difference between the material causes
and something like the vertical cause of
something and the vertical cause of
something is exactly this hierarchy that
Jordan is talking about and I would push
what Jordan is saying even further that
is it does actually affect to a certain
extent even there is because we can't
perceive and is without a hierarchy of
attention and without a hierarchy of
perception because the world is is
indefinite in detail and in quantity and
so for even to be able to say this to
point to something to say that is
already in this hierarchy of something
we could call vertical causation so this
glass has millions and millions of
aspects to it but we nonetheless are
able to see it as one and the fact that
we see it as one is the total mystery to
scientists they don't know how to
account for it the you use words like
emergence and you could just use the
word magic and would be the same it's
like this jump into Unity that is the
type of causation that we talk about we
talk about religious causes well that
that Unity that you discuss in
relationship to the glass is a pragmatic
Unity because with the security of good
well that's also Unity of good well then
you think well it's an ethical in a
general very general sense it's an
ethical Unity because it is an ethical
Community well I would say in a specific
sense because if you were a photorealist
painter you could spend a month painting
all the reflections on that gloss it's a
very complex thing to perceive but you
perceive it as a unity and we know this
neuropsychologically we know this
scientifically you perceive it as a
Unity because you can grip it
and because you can raise it to your
lips and because you can drink it and
because you need to drink water to
survive and you are willing to drink
water to survive because you believe
emotionally and motivationally and
perhaps rationally that survival is a
good and that's dependent on your belief
that human existence in some sense is
good and that it's striving towards some
sort of higher unified order and you
might think well you don't need all that
to perceive the glass and the answer is
yeah as a matter of fact you need all of
that to perceive the glass and if you
lose some of that because of various
forms of cortical damage let's say you
enter into the realm of all sorts of
bizarre blindnesses and so and so that
point you make about the is being
dependent on the art is also extremely
interesting because if the world is
infinitely complex which seems to be the
case or close enough the the hierarchy
of attention you bring to bear on it and
so your intent
determines in no small part the array of
manifestations that that Infinity will
produce in your field of apprehension
and that does determine to some degree
at least what elements of the object you
have access to and then manipulate and
then bring into being right I've been
thinking about objects too as this so
they have this reality surrounded by a
field of possibility right and so the
object isn't just what is it is it's
also a set of things that it could
become with varying degrees of
difficulty depending on your intent so
it's a combination of being and becoming
could become a weapon but it couldn't
become a car right right so so it has an
identity but it's also surrounded by a
field of possibilities that's a good way
to right right right I thought the the
the point is that when we look at the
way that the creation of the world is
described in Genesis it's it's related
exactly to that God creates something
sees it and sees that it's good and so
there's this notion of apprehension of
identities and realizing that those
identities have to do with their
the fact that they're bound up in a
value judgment even though it's not
necessarily moral it's just a value
judgment about how good something is
because if I see a glass
I am always asking is it a good glass
even if I don't do it consciously
necessarily because I have to I know
that it's there to grip and to drink
from and it's the same even with like
even scientists are doing that because
they have to focus their attention on
something because they can't study
everything at once they have to decide
I'm going to study this and I'm going to
decide going to decide the reason why I
study that and therefore I'm going to be
able to identify the facts that fit with
my theory and prove my theory so even
the scientist is moving is moving in
this type of perception of the world
even sometimes without realizing it we
could I'd like to make a comment on the
scientific front too and I really
started to think about this after
talking to Dr Dawkins and I suppose to
some degree to Sam Harris too on the
atheist front and so I know that as the
death of God in the nietzschean terms
has progressed we've lost faith in an
increasing range of uh underlying
realities and the first might be the
deistic reality but then what we've seen
happening under the onslaught of
postmodernist thought is that we're
starting to lose faith in the idea of
fact itself and then I was thinking well
what's the precondition for being a
scientist and I thought well in some
sense it's a deistic pre there's deistic
preconditions because one of the things
that characterizes scientists and this
includes people like Dawkins who's a
real scientist is that the scientist
presumes axiomatically
that there's a Transcendent realm
outside the domain of epistemological
theory so if you have a scientific
theory and you're a real scientist you
know that your theory which is really
what you see when you look at the world
you you know that your theory is
insufficient in comparison to the
reality that transcends it and so then
as a scientist what you try to do is you
try to pit your theory up against the
Transcendent reality so that it
fails so that you find something about
what you don't understand that is able
to make itself manifest then you adjust
the theory to get a better grip on the
world and you assume while you're doing
that that there's an underlying logic to
the Transcendent object and that
analysis of that underlying object is
both corrective and Redemptive and as
far as I can tell those are all
essentially axiomatic religious claims
and that and that they're preconditions
for any true empirical science and then
so what that implies is that if we lose
faith in the Transcendent hierarchy we
might lose the entire scientific
Endeavor
let me just briefly if if I may take us
away from the glass of water because I
only have Jonathan pager's word that it
is a glass of water and I don't want to
get into that
um
um let me address what I think is is a
sort of a necessary thing to begin with
which is the the issue of the magisteria
we are talking about them separately but
of course the interrelation of them the
whether or not the Realms of Science and
religion are overlapping magisterial or
not and of course some people would
claim that they're absolutely unrelated
uh we're getting towards I think in this
discussion the realization that of
course they're overlapping to some
degree we don't know exactly how much
Jonathan probably thinks very
significantly I suspect Jordan thinks to
some extent and I would say to some
extent as well but let me throw it then
two issues that I would put as a
challenge both for the religious and the
non-religious in the discussion that
we're heading towards the the first is a
challenge for the non-religious and
that's to do with something that
Jordan's already talked about which is
the area of ethics and shared values and
and much more
a great challenge for the non-believers
in our age is is that issue of where the
values come from
and and as Jordan's already suggested uh
for instance the enlightenment the idea
of rationalism Soul rationalism which
not all Enlightenment thinkers would
dealing with but many were the idea of
rationalism being the sole way in which
to discern ethics
seems to me not to have been embedded
very wide or very deep and may suggest
that it's just not possible as a project
so
to to
quote my late friend Rabbi Jonathan
Sachs on this the idea that that ethics
are self-evident is self-evidently wrong
um so let me throw that out first as a
challenge for the for the non-believer
but then the challenge for the believer
comes down to this thing that Jordan's
also already dealt in which is the issue
of let's say myth or story because we
might agree for instance that we need a
a story to agree upon or a myth to agree
upon or a set of ideas through to to
rely upon and to ground ourselves in and
that doesn't necessarily of course by
any means lead to the to the fact that
those things are also true
we get into the realm of what uh
schopenhauer and the dialogue on
religion which always made a huge
impression on me deals in where he says
of course he what he describes as a
tragedy of the clergy
that the tragedy of the clergy is that
they know the necessity of the thing
they know the truthfulness of the story
in a certain sense of truthfulness but
could never admit or their job would be
over that that's what it is
in other words they have to continue to
deal in it as if this is not simply
story or unifying myth or anything like
that but is something which has a truth
claim behind it and then let me just say
one other thing on that which is this
the issue of unifying ethic because it
must be what we're sort of somehow also
among other things as well as trying to
Define what the true is and what the
real is must be one of the things that
we must sort of try to Grapple towards
the the the issue on this seems to me to
be is is the Christian ethic the
Christian tradition
to think of it in hegelian terms is is
it an exhausted force or an unexhausted
Force
uh this this for our age seems to me to
be
uh one of the absolutely crucial issues
to address
uh is it exhausted or unexhausted
right I I have a few things to say first
about the idea of the the ethic question
now there's something which is actually
especially in your project there's
something which is more than about
ethics and about how we should act it
has to do with the glass sorry but let's
bring it to people now it has to do with
why do we think
people are the same how do we recognize
ourselves as being the west or being
England or America like there these
things that's
first that's the question that is how
what is it that we have in common that
we celebrate in common that we recognize
in common
as binding us together
and my contention is that one of the
things that happened this during the
Enlightenment is that people thought we
can get rid of God but we can keep our
nation or whatever but then that was a
slippery slippery slope and as soon as
we got rid of the transcended the thing
we we wanted to have the king the Queen
the president the this this narrative
which was at a lower level started to
crumble and to break down and so it has
it has it's not just about how we should
act but it's even how we recognize each
other as belonging to the same category
yeah but let me let me let me let me
leap in there with something else I I
would go a level beneath that which is
which is something which I think we
could agree on which the enlightenment
thing is what we're dealing in and the
religious are dealing which is is it is
a much more important issue than mere
issues of nationhood or belonging which
is are we beings with value
yeah that's for sure very important that
that of course historically uh is is is
not the case uh most empires in history
in ancient world and much more so so
most people as having no value
one of the revelations obviously I use
the term in a certain degree of
quotation mark but one of the
revelations of the Christian tradition
is the idea that everybody does have
intrinsic value and we've all grown up
and everyone after everyone during the
Enlightenment is dealing in those terms
they're trying to extend if anything the
idea of Christian value and there are
some Christian theologians who say the
very idea of where we are now is in a
sense an embodiment of the Christian
tradition which is in the tradition of
human rights law and much more
we accept it like fish except water that
people have value but that of course as
we know we can look around the world
today to other places and other parts of
the world and we realize that there are
still parts of the world where where
people do not have any value under their
lives are regarded as valueless and that
isn't even regarded as being a the
tragedy in the way that we would regard
it so so the idea that that we're beings
with value is something that has been so
deeply built into our uh uh our senses
of society that don't even realize that
this is what we're swimming in now
obviously that comes from the from from
the Christian tradition it comes with
the idea that we're created in the image
of God
being exactly the the the image of God
and then
and and then the enlightenment the
rationalist project obviously to some
extent extends
or tries to embed into deepen aspects of
that including of course I mean the the
idea of religious toleration because
again I mean one of the reasons why
Europe
stopped believing was not just what I
laid out as having happened in the 19th
century but the but the the perhaps the
worst the worst realization of all which
was the repeated realization that
peoples of Faith could not exist
together
I mean this this is what Europe learns
in the 16th century and it it takes it
goes awfully deep that realization
and changes everything part of the
striving towards monotheism let's say If
you think about that psychologically I
would say the striving towards
monotheism
is a descriptive Enterprise to some
degree because it's an attempt to
characterize this nature of the spirit
that should be put at the highest place
in the hierarchy of perception and
action and then that begs the question
is what should be put in the highest
place and so let me walk through
something and you guys tell me what you
think about this so I used to ask my
students you know why are you writing
this essay and so
and that's a variation of the question
why do anything but let's make it
concrete why are you writing this essay
well so that I can get a grade for the
class why are you taking the class
so that I can finish my year at
University why are you
finishing your University and motivated
to do that to get my degree why do you
want the degree well then it gets
fuzzier well maybe I want a job or maybe
I want to educated per want to be an
educated person or some amalgam of those
why do you think it's a good reason to
be an educated person or to have a
productive career
well because I want to be a good person
well why do you want to be a good person
well because that's part of acting out
and this is where it starts to delve
into the mythological because being a
good person makes Society work properly
and is the best route to say life more
abundant
and so what does it mean to be a good
person then it means something like well
torrent yourself towards the highest
good and to speak the truth
and then that's a whole hierarchy of
value that is definitely governing
either in an integrated manner or a
disintegrated manner the actions of the
person who's writing the essay and you
might say well how hard are you going to
try when you write this essay and the
answer to that would be well it depends
on how well integrated my view of the
ethic is all the way up to the highest
place
and then we could say well the highest
place is the Divine place and we could
make that a matter of definition and so
then we might say well what should be in
the Divine place and I would say Well it
has to be something that you can look at
the world through and it has to be
something you act out and then we could
say well that still leaves residual
mystery and then we might ask well how
do we characterize it I would say we
characterize that using fiction
because fiction is the abstraction of
hierarchies of attentional
prioritization and action and so we
could say that in the highest sense in
the biblical Corpus God is the ultimate
fictional character
and and here's and then we're trying to
characterize his nature as that which
should be emulated that unites us
psychologically and socially and so I'll
walk through like five representations
so what should be in the highest place
okay the spirit that allows you to walk
unself-consciously in the garden
the spirit that calls you to the
appropriate dedicated sacrifice so
that's from the Cain and Abel story the
spirit that calls you to batten down the
hatch is if you're wise when the floods
are coming
the spirit that warns you against
producing totalitarian spirits of
uh uh towers of Babel
the spirit that calls you to out of your
father's attent that's Abraham to the
adventure of your life
the spirit that calls you out of the
tyranny of Egypt or any tyranny into the
desert and then guides you through the
desert
and then I'll skip the rest of the Old
Testament for the sake of brevity and
jump into the New Testament because
there's a characterization of that which
is in the highest place that's
revolutionary that emerges out of the
Old Testament but it's the it's the
volunt it's the spirit that makes you
voluntarily willing to Bear the entire
Cross of human suffering and malevolence
and then that character that's at the
top of the hierarchy of attention and
action that's characterized as God you
can say well is that a fiction
it's a fiction but you have to retool
your notion of fiction because fiction
then becomes the deepest form of ethical
abstraction and so it's a meta truth
rather than a falsehood and then if
Jonathan's right and I think he is and I
think John verakee agrees with this is
that if we have to perceive the world
with its multiplicity of possibilities
through the lens of an ethic that ethic
becomes the defining
tool
that we use in fact to extract even
factual information out of the
infinite array of information that
presents itself to us and so not only
is science nested inside a fiction in
some sense the fiction is more deeply
true than the science and it's so deeply
true that without the fiction you don't
even have the precondition for science
although is it still a fiction is it
still a fiction Jordan because for you
this is yourself
Jonathan and I were talking about this
last night you know about because we
just sat and did this long seminar on
Exodus and you might ask well did did
the events in Exodus really happen and
our conclusion was well not only did
they they happened in a in a meta manner
they're still happening
they happen so in they happened with
such reality that they haven't stopped
happening and so and what does that mean
well everyone still struggles with the
spirit of tyranny
and everyone still struggles with the
fact that when you
escape from a tyranny you you don't hit
the promised land you hit the desert and
then when you're in the desert of your
imagination or with your lost peers then
you need to struggle with what guides
you and what should guide you when
you're lost and then you have to Grapple
with the problem of
appropriate and uh uh
reliable forms of governance because
that's all part of The Exodus story and
so it didn't happen the way a happening
would occur if you just detailed it out
as a camera holding empirical Observer
it happened in a way deeper way that
just doesn't stop happening
so I think that that's that for me like
for sure the fiction thing is a
difficulty for me that category but I I
can follow the process and understand
this idea that they have abstracted
this abstracted story that moves up but
then what I think is that it's it's
causal that what we're actually
discovering a pattern which is causal to
the rest and so that it's not just that
it's a fiction it's actually that which
gives it makes it possible for the world
to exist and so the word fiction at this
point becomes ridiculous it's not a
fiction it's actually the source of
reality and so that's God right it's the
source of the possibility for reality to
exist and the manner in which let's say
that happens is not just a description
of mechanical causes it has to do with
this this orientation towards the good
this ethic which comes down and makes us
even it makes it even possible for us to
perceive the world and so and so I think
that for me for sure it's not it's not a
fiction I I think that the the
the events in scripture happened but
they don't have to be described in a way
that is equivalent to our scientific
understanding because they're trying to
account for more than our scientific
understanding just like well the reason
I would
throw a word in here for fiction I mean
we would have to retool our
understanding of what fiction is yeah
and so that's part of the problem but
when I read something like a novel by
Dostoevsky I think well is this true and
the answer is well those precise events
never happened so on that basis it's not
true but then there's something wrong
with that description because the
characterizations in Dostoevsky are so
true that in some sense they've never
been surpassed and so and I do think to
to to elaborate on Jonathan's point is
that imagine that human beings like any
other object have a a being and then a
realm of possible becoming and I would
say our attempts to characterize the
spirit at the top of the attentional
hierarchy is an attempt to flesh out and
to discover the realm of human
possibility and so it does bring it into
being to some degree even though it's
it's imp it's implicate in the order
and that would be the logos of of the
world right it's like what's the Bible
about well it's about people clearly
and so everything that's detailed out in
those stories is about the nature of
humanity now how that's related to the
nature of the Divine is something we're
trying to puzzle out but it's clearly
about people and is it true well it it
has this weird sense of being true that
we just described which is also of
reality which is that in a world that
understands this or lives in this way
then the manner that they will perceive
remember and tell stories will be
different from the way that you tell a
policeman the type of proof that you saw
and so what we're asking of scripture
is not only not the right questions
we're not understanding what type of
descriptions that they are and so I I do
believe that the stories in scripture
happen but I don't believe that the
people who recorded them had to do it in
a way that accounts for our our forensic
uh nature let's say the way that we
think that something happened in the
world in terms of a scientist would
described phenomena I think that they're
doing it in a manner to show this very
pattern in the story of what it is that
that was happening in the world yes I'm
wary about some of this because we need
to get down to Brass tax as it were and
uh Jonathan has done one but Jordan you
you said you you talked about it again
as you
uh as a story and as you say I mean
Dostoyevsky obviously if you say his
Dostoyevsky true you need to say in what
sense but then I mean the issue with the
Bible the issue with Christianity the
issue with faith is that it's obviously
different it must be in a different
realm it's clearly in a different realm
because it claims different things for
itself
it doesn't demand that we believe that
was called nickov lived
the Bible if you're going to be a
believer
you have to be able to say
in the words of the Creed that that you
believe that you believe in the Virgin
birth
but do you believe most importantly in
the resurrection
and and and and and as you well know
Jordan many of us can walk 99 of the way
there in terms of belief in the in the
in the truth of the story or as Benjamin
puts it but is it true is it true and
then stumble on the last thing yeah yeah
well okay so
one of the things you pointed out in
your conversation with Dave Rubin was
that religious the religious substrate
risks devolving into something like uh
purile social justice without its
rooting in something like Transcendent
mystery and so let's just leave that as
a proposition for a moment and then I
want to return to the issue of the
Resurrection
so I'll push that as far as I've been
able to push it and so
it definitely appears to me that the
story of the passion is an archetypal
and foretold
tragic catastrophe
and I'll explain the foretold part later
so it's an archetypal catastrophe
because it melds all the worst things
that could happen to a person in their
life
and so it's death
but it's knowledge of certain death
associated with death and then it's
youthful death and then it's youthful
death at the hands of the mob and its
youthful death at the hands of the mob
despite innocence despite the mob
knowing of innocence and then it's just
and and in front of the mother
in front of the mother yes and as a
consequence of the relativistic nihilism
of the Romans and the Tyranny and the
choice of the crowd and so and and the
Betrayal of a best friend all of that
and so it is definitely a journey
through all the worst things you could
confront in your life but then that's
not enough eh because there's the
there's the mythological Cloud let's say
around the narrative because dying
horribly and unjustly isn't enough
you also have to go to hell
and and Harrow it and so then so that
would mean that the ultimate extension
of The Human Experience is not only the
confrontation with malevolence and
unjust death of the innocent but a
genuine journey into hell
okay then the question would be and and
this is the sticker as far as I'm
concerned is
n't it the case that in your own life
Douglas that the more deeply that you've
peered into the abyss of things
the more likely it is that a light
shines through it
and this is sort of the ultimate
question of the Resurrection is like how
do you revivify your faith in life and
the answer might be it might really be
by the radical acceptance of the
malevolent tragedy of life but even more
than that by the radical embracing of
even the hellish aspect of life and that
if you did that radically enough
well who knows what would happen
I mean we know clinically look we know
clinically if you find what people are
avoiding and are afraid of and are
disgusted by that's blocking their
pathway forward and you get them to
confront that voluntarily they get
courageous and better
it's clearly the case and it looks to me
like the the passion
representation and its mythological
substrate is exposure therapy on a
cosmic level and you you know that the
more deeply you grapple with the
fundamental issues of Life the wiser and
broader you get and then I guess I would
ask if if everyone did that to the
utmost
what would it be that we might be able
to conquer
and like and I don't know the answer to
that the life would radically transform
I mean I see what happens because people
write me all the time I see what happens
when people adopt a certain amount of
responsibility for their life I mean
they write and they say man everything's
way better it's like okay how much
better could it be and and this is also
associated with this idea in the in the
New Testament there's a there's a
section I believe it's in The Sermon on
the Mount where
Christ says it might not be but he says
that heaven will not emerge and all
things will not manifest themselves till
everyone brings everything inside them
out right their Divine possibility let's
say and that part of the reason that the
world is Fallen the way it is is because
we hold back our best
and we don't abide by the law and the
prophetic spirit and we don't bring
everything that's within us out into the
world and the world is lesser as a
consequence of that and
and I do believe that we don't bring our
best out because we're afraid and
because we're desperate and because we
don't have the courage to confront the
malevolence and suffering and the
hellish aspect of life and so I do think
so you look at the death and you say
well is the death more real and the hell
more real or is the resurrection more
real and obviously in some sense I'm
speaking symbolically but it seems to me
it's the same idea you know that it's
ancient mythological idea that you could
go into the belly of the Beast and
rescue your father
and you know you're trying to do that
with your book the war in the west right
it's like you see the assault on these
values and you're attempting to
resurrect those values I see that as the
same pattern yeah but I I think
so I think Douglas I understand your
question like I understand your question
the answer is is the grave empty
something like that like was the grave
empty and this is I think where maybe
it's the most difficult
for many materialists to understand and
I know that my like ramblings about the
glass and about the good and about this
might seem like it's going all all over
the place but it's actually supremely
important to understand that if you
change your perception about the manner
in which the world exists Focus based on
the idea of a good of an ethic that it's
what underlies the even the factuality
of the world then that which will
convince me of the truth of the
Resurrection
it's not about a bunch of material facts
it's about the imposition of that story
of being so real that it overwhelms
everything else and it shines a light on
everything else through the image of the
Resurrection we're able to see
everything through it and so if you ask
me like what is the mechanical cause of
the Resurrection like how is it that
this body could have I would say that is
obfuscated not only in the text but also
in the Creed the reason why in the Creed
it says he rose again according to the
scriptures because nobody wanted to try
to give you a mechanical description and
in the text itself when the disciples
encountered Christ they don't even
recognize them what is going on there
they don't even know who he is well in
the beginning it Emmaus yes yeah so
there's a desire in the text to
obfuscate the mechanical causes of the
resurrection and that is not the way so
if you try to get at it that way you're
never going to get there obviously but I
don't get there that way because I don't
I see through the world through the
resurrection and it makes so much more
sense and that's that's maybe crcs
Lewis's argument is to say it's like
give me that one we need one Miracle
everybody needs one Miracle to then lay
the world out from from that Miracle
whether it's the big bang whether it's
whatever it is you need that first
miracle so give me the resurrection and
I'll explain the entire Key Of Human
Experience through that one Miracle so
that is what convinces me of the
Resurrection I don't know if that makes
sense to you so so so I was thinking
about this idea to this I'm sure
Jonathan loves some criticisms of this
idea but we'll see so there's this idea
in Christianity that
the the the voluntary sacrifice of
Christ
redeemed the world and so then you might
ask well and that that's already
happened in some fundamental sense but
the stories that put that proposition
forward play with the idea of time in an
extreme way because you have the notion
for example of God being the Alpha and
the Omega and being outside of time and
so the manner in which time is being
used in the stories is very
it's very mysterious
but then I would say well
it seems to me that it's something like
this is that a sufficiently courageous
confrontation with the catastrophe of
life would redeem it to an indeterminate
degree and that's already happened
because we have the example but even
though it's already happened we still
have to do it
it's something like that and and you
know there's this emphasis in in in the
biblical writings in particular that
each person has a Divine part to play
and that in some sense the part that
each person plays is equally necessary
and equally valuable and so
we have the pattern which is to confront
things in this forthright of manner as
we possibly can and to Bear the maximal
degree of responsibility and that will
redeem things but we still have a real
Destiny like we each have something real
to do that hasn't been that's been
granted to us or that hasn't been taken
away from us or lifted away from us and
we could turn the world into hell if we
wanted to but we could maybe do the
alternative
in some real sense
I don't disagree with that what Jonathan
says about the resurrection and reality
of course raises a particular conundrum
which is that if you're going to use uh
religion
as an explanation of reality
you're also describing the event that
subverts reality completely
that the resurrection is the thing that
is the least possible thing to do given
the world as we understand it
at least possible than the big bang for
example
I I don't know okay I see I see all
scientists move towards something which
is least possible let's say as a pre oh
yeah of course that's something that is
impossible as a precondition for
possibility
I'm what I'm trying to get to is a sort
of not a diminish it but having your
cake and eating it thing which is
religion explaining reality reality
explained by religion and also
this thing happens that has never been
able to happen and that if you can make
that leap then you've got the faith in
religion I'm not saying that this isn't
possible to do you obviously do it
yourself but it's two things that seem
to be in some very very deep way
contradictory
and maybe the contradiction is the point
well I think you also do it imperfectly
you know I mean you you ask yourself
I mean you're
in some ways on the edges of the
cultural Battlefront you know you ask
yourself well how much of the
catastrophe of the world can you
voluntarily take on
there's many many problems that beset us
and there's a great adventure in trying
to rectify them
and it's an open question how much
better you can get at that if you
proceed in this Spirit of good will
I think that's an indication in the most
fundamental sense of your belief you
know because we don't want to reduce
this to a proposition again
because I don't think that's the right I
think it's a it's an axiom of Faith it's
something like okay do I believe in the
resurrection it's like well it's not a
scientific proposition
at least I'm not going to treat it that
way at the moment it's a matter of
confronting reality and and the and so
that it would be a statement of faith
which is that I believe that if I act
in oriented towards love and life more
abundant and if I speak the truth then
then I can Prevail against the gates of
hell
and I'm willing to put my life on the
line
to see if that's true
and I would say that's the faith right
because who knows
but what's the alternative it's like are
we going to accept the ultimate
what would you say the ultimate
metaphysical reality of the
pointlessness of being and the
atrociousness of hellish suffering I
mean it looks to me like we can Rectify
that and it also looks like we have to
move towards that rectification in
something like Faith right okay but let
me return to the the two questions I
posed earlier on about this where the
thing that the religious have a problem
with and the thing that the
non-religious have a problem with and
putting my cards on the table I would be
I would be relatively happy for
Jonathan's view to be dominant in my
Society
and for me never to be asked whether I
literally believe in the resurrection
to dodge the question I'd I'd be
relatively happy for that to be the
situation because there is the place
where where we get into
an awful lot of problems but that but
that there is virtue and and good in
what he's describing we we could leave
it as a mystery unless our age happened
to be leaning on this because it needed
to know whether whether the story was
literally true more than Dostoyevsky
more than the great poetry that it was
the thing that we relied on more than
anything
you would need to know that in that
situation so I think that for sure
Christians believe that the resurrection
happened that it's an event that it's
something
that is not just a fiction in in the
simplest sense but they also do insist
that you can't you can't uh describe it
in terms of mechanical causes that it's
not it cannot be reduced to that and so
when people always ask me like did Jesus
sit up in the grave and I'm like I don't
that's not what the text says when if
you read what it says in Scripture it
leaves it very mysterious at what the
event is I think for the the reason that
it is in some way a meta event it's an
event which is you know even even in
scripture there's even this description
that talks about Christ as being the
lamb that was sacrificed before the
foundation of the world that is the
notion that the sacrifice that the death
and the resurrection of Christ is in
some ways the foundation of reality so
and it's not I know it's hard because
people are such scientists and such
materialists that it's they struggle but
that's why we I try to help people
understand this the the
the fact that attention precedes
phenomena and that's why sacrifice is
comes before phenomena the importance of
sacrificing the externals of being able
to perceive and give up the unity of
something that is actually the
foundation of reality and so it's
ritualized in cultures as actual
physical sacrifice that's fine but then
it leads up to the mystery that of
Christ which is that ultimately the
highest version of that is
self-sacrifice and if you do that and
you participate in that you are gaining
a key to the mystery of how reality
actually lays itself look look let's
look at I've always been struck by
Michelangelo's pieta and so because it's
a sacrificial offering and so we could
say well what's the precondition for the
life of a autonomous child and the
precondition is that the mother is
willing to offer up the child as a
sacrificial entity in the face of life
and the psychoanism just used to
describe the necessary failure of the
mother so that's the anti-edible mother
the edible mother
protects and shelters right and then
destroys because of that whereas the
non-edible mother let's go so the child
can be hurt and broken and killed by the
world and so then you might say well the
willingness to sacrifice the innocent to
the realities of existence is a
precondition for existence and I
actually think that's true and and so
Jonathan's notion that the sacrifice of
the innocent lamb is a precondition for
existence you could say at least that
that's true phenomenologically
or maybe for the Existence that isn't
hell because that's another way of
thinking about it let me let me just
pick up on this on this point again
because
we might be returning to to this this
what I describe as these these two two
problems we've got to address the first
is whether whether whether it's possible
to accept the the idea of religion being
true in some sense and essentially
Philosophy for the masses
which is how many 19th century thinkers
were already thinking about it that it's
that that you can say it's true in some
sense
and it's the best way to allow the
largest number of people to contend with
the deepest set of ideas
because philosophy is only ever going to
be an Elite Sport and no derogatory term
of the meaning Elite but only a small
number of people are going to engage in
it most people are not going to engage
in it therefore religion is the best
means to engage with meaning in the
world that's one way of seeing things to
begin with but the second and that
that's something we could contend with
but the second thing I wanted to say is
is is just to give Jonathan a breather
as well some of my demands which is
which is what about the non-religious in
this and the non-religious problem in
all of this it comes back to what you
described earlier Jordan as the patterns
problem the patterns we see in the
universe including patterns of Truth
what does the non-believer do when they
find for instance the beauty of a
mathematical formula
which works and is there
and is and is true what does it mean
what does it mean when we find the
extraordinary patterns in nature uh um
what what does it mean when we find
patterns in our own lives and what you
describe as things like that thing that
people can can recognize of needing to
see through the void and see the glimpse
of light what we do about the sense for
instance that we we know that we're
contending with a very very difficult
problem in our lives so many difficult
problems in our lives one of which
perhaps the most the deepest of which is
does this matter does this matter Beyond
itself or one of my favorite quotes from
rilka rilka says in one of the Arduino
elegies does the outer space into which
we dissolve tastes of us at all
does the outer space into which we
dissolve tastes of us at all now our
senses probably one of our deepest hopes
is that the answer is yes
that what we do in our lives does not
just matter to us or just to the people
around us although that's not nothing
but matters in some Far higher sense and
then we get to that question underneath
that which is
are we simply meaning seeking beings or
is there meaning
and the problem with this question is it
leans us towards the second one our
deepest hope is that the second one is
true
okay so so when I look at that
I start by trying to determine what
people react to as if it's real
and the scientific answer would be well
there's nothing more real than matter
and I would say no that's not actually
how people
that's not actually how people act when
push comes to shove people act like
there's nothing more real than pain
and you can't argue yourself out of pain
or you can do that with great difficulty
and so so we could start with the
reality of suffering and then I would
say that that's a phenomenological
description or an existential
description of reality but I'm okay with
that because I'm not going to make the
assumption that reality is fundamentally
material and devoid of purpose it might
be but it might not be because we're
trying to figure out what's fundamental
okay we act as if pain is real we act as
if the pain of infants is particularly
real okay then you might say well is
there anything more real than pain and I
would say yeah there is
the meaning that overcomes pain is more
real than the pain
and then I would say well that's
actually what meaning is
and I I could speak psychologically
about this it's like
we know the quality of a meaningful
experience it's engaging it's engrossing
it activates positive emotion and
enthusiasm it makes people more creative
it quells anxiety and it's an analgesic
probably mediated by opiate mechanisms
and then the the phenomena of meaning
seems to emerge on the axis between
Chaos and Order and so let's say that we
fall into a deeply meaningful
conversation like the one we're having
now and the reason it's meaningful is
because our nervous systems are
signaling to us that we're inhabiting a
structure that we comprehend and that's
secure and that we understand what's
going on
so we're not anxious and upset but we're
moving new information into that
structure at an optimized rate
and our nervous system signals to us
that that's deeply meaningful and that
regulates our positive emotion and
quells our negative emotion but I think
all of that's occurring in relationship
to this entire hierarchy of attentional
priority that we described and so the
more deeply meaningful something is the
more It's associated with every level in
that hierarchy all the way up to the
level of divinity itself and then it's a
matter of Faith it's like well is that a
reflection of fundamental reality and
the answer might be it might be we also
don't have access to any other reality
like it's actually the other reality
that doesn't participate in this
hierarchy of attention this hierarchy of
goods which is uh it's like a I would I
would say a delusion but it's at least
something that you're positing without
much proof that it exists that is that
that the world out there completely
exists neutrally without a value
hierarchy which sustains it into unities
is something which I think is more
dubious than the than the other way
around and so the that you could you
take the scientific evidence supports
that you could take your idea of pain
and meaning and you could reduce it to
the most simple experience of the world
which is question answer what is pain
and that is the meaning and that happens
all the time like you you encounter a
phenomena that you've never seen before
and that phenomena is screaming at you
like I'm am I dangerous what am I what
is this and then you there's a the
manner in which we're able to bring it
together and to give it a name and to
identify it and and that that we that's
already meaning their identification of
things especially if we understand that
it's neces it necessitates a hierarchy
of attention is always meaning it's
actually harder to live without meaning
in the very you can't move without
meaning right you can't Point your eyes
without you would just lay in bed and
wait to die without meaning like nothing
would exist in the a well nothing would
have light in it I completely agree I
mean and I think it's one of perhaps the
biggest questions of our age of where
you can find that as it always has been
it's just that the options on
the options in the buffet at the moment
are
um all demanding of something which a
lot of people in our society at the very
least find it hard to accept
um you know what you've just described
about I mean the nature of sacrifice for
instance and all these things we know
from Girard and others I mean these are
these are these are at such a deep level
they they
certainly come before religion they
certainly come before any of the
religions that we currently have in the
world today is still operating I mean
what's the oldest religion we have in
the in the world Judaism that's still
actively a religion is three and a half
thousand years old or whatever is is is
is is is Young compared to the instincts
we're talking about such as the need for
a scapegoat the need for sacrifice I
mean we we we go back thousands of years
and we keep finding some kind of
organized belief system which believed
in sacrifice and totally futile
sacrifice in the cases of of most of
these the these ideas but but but the
question of of meaning that comes from
that is I I come back to this thing that
that Jordan was just touching on I I
agree Jordan that this if we agree that
the thing that's most real and most
um to be overcome by us in our lives is
suffering then we have to work out what
the thing is that can counter suffering
and then we find that there's probably
only one thing in the world that can
counter suffering which is love and
that's that's an instinct that's an
instinct that we may
have because of the tradition that we've
come from it's possible
or it's possible that it's at such a
deep level that people had it whether
they came from this tradition of ideas
and reality or not well I think it was
at least latent there before you know
because that also that also brings up
the question of to what degree something
exists except in potential before it's
been dramatized and conceptualized I
mean I think we if you look at the work
of people like friends dewal with
non-human primates chimps in particular
you see the emergence in chimp social
hierarchies of something like long-term
reciprocal altruism as the basis for the
stable polity and Society it's not
oppression and it's not power now you
might say well is that love and the
answer is well it's sort of love the
same way that a chimpanzee recognizing
himself in a mirror is sort of
self-consciousness but once it's
elaborated up and turned into something
communicable and sharpened by dialogue
and philosophical inquiry and and
aesthetic effort it becomes it becomes
more real right it's a possibility that
becomes deeper and more real well we'll
look at look how weak look how weak the
exhaustive force of of even the thing
we're talking there is perhaps the most
real thing has become in recent
Generations look at the sloganing around
love for instance I mean the ease with
which it's turned into a sort of
greeting card like thing that the
placards of protesters say all you need
is love the sort of John lennonism of of
the society we know that in some sense
even this deepest the most important
thing can be cheap and if it's not as
you say sharpened unless it's made
actual in some way as if as if you don't
have something around it that makes it
stronger it's like I always contend you
know one of The Oddities of being in a
society that's essentially
post-christian or at least post-literal
Christian is that people hold on to bits
of it like I know Angels or Angelic
forces without having any idea what
they're talking about other than there's
a nice idea of something they dream
about don't you think that the idea of
Love Is deepened by its admixture with
the appreciate creation of hell and
suffering I mean my family has been
through very dire illnesses lately and
one of the things that guide us through
those illnesses was love and I don't
think that you have any sense of the
depth of Love unless it's it's it's
experienced as the antidote to
cataclysmic tragedy and malevolence let
me add one think that I agree let me add
one thing to that though love may be the
thing that can support you through
terrible suffering the love the love of
your loved ones towards you and you
towards them but there's something more
than that which is
which is a bigger ambition a bigger
Drive uh I don't know if you know the on
an Arundel tomb of Philip Larkin
his description I'm sorry to keep
reverting to poets but maybe it's a good
thing to keep reverting to
um he describes uh uh uh that Ireland
Countess in an English church church uh
lying side by side in stone they're
Stone Effigies and they have their hat
their hands are intertwined still and
they've been they've been there for 700
years the ill encounters lion Stone and
the last lines of the poem were Larkin
is of course a very a wounded
non-believer a mournful non-believer
says at the end of this poem that that
the the the site of this triggers in him
he says that a a sense of he says of our
almost instinct being almost true what
will survive of us is love
now that seems to me people quite often
tear that line out and they forget he's
saying almost instinct almost true
because you can sense that he's wishing
it to be true he wills it to be true but
the reason why that line and that poem
finds such resonance with people is
because it does seem to be something
that we all wish for it's not just that
love in our lives can see us through but
that to go back to that quote of real
it's something that echoes in the
universe it's something that survives
after us it's something bigger than us
and there we get to Jonathan's realm
which is that here we're in the realm of
religion that religion would explain
that when you love someone I do believe
that what you see in them is something
like a glimpse of the Eternal embedded
in the finite and so and we don't really
understand the relationship between the
finite and the Eternal and we certainly
have the apprehension at times in our
life that we're making content contact
with the Eternal inside the finite and
we also see that as deeply revivifying I
think you get that in the in the face of
beauty you get that in the face of music
you get that in the face of love and I
I'm loath to say that that's not the
deepest reality and because we don't
understand the relationship between the
finite and the infinite we don't know
how our actions echo in the Eternal
landscape and I'm unwilling to think
that the me that the instincts that
Orient us towards our deepest sources of
meaning that intimate an immortality and
an infinity beyond our apprehension our
erroneous because they Orient us so well
I mean the great cathedrals of Europe
they're they're oriented towards a time
span that's out outside the mere mortal
but there's something absolutely
Magnificent about that ambition and this
notion of a love that survives death is
like well if you love your wife and you
have children and you have children in
that love and that love propagates
itself to an to an unspecified degree
out into the world and into the future
and so we don't we don't understand the
relationship between the finite and the
infinite but I don't think we can reduce
the infinite to the finite and dispense
with it and and that seems to demoralize
people completely unbelievable it's the
cause of demoralization in our society
the single greatest cause of
demoralization in society seems to me
not just this uh the issue of not having
a story not having a
um a structure but the sense that
nothing matters and the other people
don't think it matters and what you do
doesn't matter so why would you bother
doing anything why would you bother
setting sail into the wind and trying to
discover new things why would you bother
with any endeavors I mean what's the
point of even prolonging life if it's
just another 10 years sitting on the
couch watching Netflix like what's the
point of any of this and and and and and
there's so little I mean you're doing it
a lot of course and Jonathan's doing a
lot and I'm doing a tiny bit but there
is so little in our society saying to
people here is something worth finding
your way towards and and I absolutely
agree Jordan the the the even if you
don't even need the religion you don't
even need religion or to think you have
the religious urge to do this but in our
lives we find these moments it's what
our late friend Roger scrutin described
in one of his essays is effingly
ineffable the the struggle he he said um
in the volume of his essays that I wrote
a new introduction to last year
um Confessions of a heretic I much urge
people to read this essay if they don't
know it's three pages long it's it's
easier to get through but we'll we'll
very very much influence people
Effingham people Roger says is this he
knows there is these things in our lives
We cannot put our finger upon and yet we
will continue always want to want to do
so we we know that there are moments in
our lives on the winding staircase of
Our Lives where we see something and we
Glimpse it and we know we can't reach it
but then it speaks to us of a thing we
cannot reach and you can put words to it
you can say it's the Divine you can say
this is the justification of religion or
you can say I don't know what this is
but whatever it is suggests to me now
and I could run off it for a lot of the
rest of my life that there is something
not just me in the universe
let's say based on what you're you're
saying and I think this also is a point
that I wanted to make regarding the
question of belief there's a lot of talk
about relief and and I can't believe
this or I believe that and that ethics
and belief but the thing about religion
is that it's practice it's not it's
actually not belief although belief is
part of it but it's it's embodiment and
it's practice and it's and it's worship
and so this this moment that you talk
about this moment where you Glimpse
something this love which transcends
this momentary where you feel like
you're transported well the answer the
only answer to that that we can have is
something like gratitude right it's
something like this moment of of
gratitude and of recognizing it as this
gift which comes from more let's say and
I think that the truth is that that is
actually that's the foundation even of
the Christian religion those churches
that are there that's what they're for
right there are objects of worship
they're they're objects that point up to
the sky in this celebration and
gratitude for those exact moments and
those things those glimpses of light
that we are given that guide us through
the world and so I think think that
sometimes when we talk about you know I
can believe this thing or this miracle
or this you know and we get caught up
but if we engage in this act of
gratitude like if you go into church
into a beautiful service where the choir
is singing and you are elevating
yourself in that moment that is actually
yeah that is actually the source and in
some ways some of the more difficult
parts of belief will they they will
figure themselves out let's say sure you
know so one of the things I've really
learned from talking to Jonathan I think
he's helped me understand the stress on
something like communal celebration and
worship and and I I've experimented this
with this in my life with Tammy these
religious practices and you know
practice makes perfect and so well
what's the opposite of resentment well
it's something like gratitude okay so
maybe you could practice being grateful
and what's the opposite of Deceit well
it's truth so maybe you could practice
telling the truth and the opposite of
hate is love Etc and you can practice
these and then at least you could say
that what happens when people are going
to church is that they're attempting to
point themselves towards the highest
good and to practice and the belief is
that the practice is worthwhile it's not
a if it's reduced to the propositional
then we end up in the weeds but you know
I'm I've been always struck by the
beauty of of of European architecture
especially the classic Christian
architecture which is stunning beyond
comprehension in some real sense and
it's it's something to be able to open
yourself up to that and you are opening
yourself up to the to have a glimpse of
the infinite and then you think well how
do people find themselves revivified and
I would say well you can look at
communal practices we go to sports
stadiums and we celebrate masterful
athletes hitting the goal which is the
opposite of sin because sin means to
miss the target it means to miss the
mark and we go to rock concerts where we
can collectively worship the harmonious
patterns of being spontaneously played
out and we find respite and nourishment
in great literature and in the love of
our friends and there is a way to live
that that encourages you to seek that
out and to notice the fact that it's
revivifying and I would say that's well
that's the practice of Faith it's like
well I could get better at being
grateful I could get better at caring
for other people I I I I obviously this
is one of the one of the key uh
advantages uh and I don't say that with
any um derogatory
uh spin but this is one of the key
advantages of religion uh organized
worship organized weekly worship
um
um as you say the moment of of being
able to feel grateful which is as you
know I wrote about this my last book is
the only Possible only possible answer
to the the culture of resentment but but
but
absent a weekly hour or hour and a half
where you you have that you have to
recognize your sins and what you've done
against other people and you have to
signal that you would like to be better
uh going forward and that you would like
to
um after all this is what the Eucharist
is about memorialize again the most
important thing that happened unless you
unless you have that as it were in the
calendar for most people all of these
things slip by and it's always going to
be a um you're never going to find the
week in the the hour in the week where
you even turn off your damn iPhone and
and look out the window
um so so of course organized religion
always has this this very distinct
Advantage I I know it myself whenever I
sidel into the back of a cathedral
usually for an even song it has to be
said because
um this seems to me to be the best way
to engage without engaging beyond your
level of
um
tolerance should we say
um and by the way I add a side note
which is something I'm sure you'll both
agree with which is the one of the great
tragedies of our era is that the
churches uh have pretty much given up
all the most beautiful things they had
including giving giving up the most
beautiful liturgy they had giving up the
most beautiful music they had often
closing the most beautiful buildings
they have and replacing there were sort
of banal third-rate green piecesm uh I
mean I mean that aside as my friend Tom
Holland says you know I'd love them to
concentrate on the weird stuff I'd love
them to concentrate on the angels and
the cherubim and the resurrection and
the the version but I wish they did that
and it wasn't just another place or you
get another manifestation of the same
boring regurgitated path of the time I
wish that the churches would do that
more but that aside yes this is one of
the great advantages of religion and it
signals that there is something we need
to do we do need to as human beings
engage actively in these processes we're
talking about otherwise we will always
push them off for another day well and
collectively well so when I was a kid
you know there was a corrosive cynical
attitude towards Sunday Christians as
well these people go to church for an
hour and they're Christians and then the
rest of the time they go back to their
old Wayward ways and I kind of bought
into that as a teenager and regarded as
a form of hypocrisy but then when I got
older and possibly wiser I thought well
at least they were bloody well doing it
publicly for an hour
like that's not nothing it's 50 hours a
year you know it's it's what three
thousand dollars in the lifetime that's
a third of the way to being an expert
and what are we going to replace that
with to get rid of the hypocrisy well
we're not gonna ever devote any
attention whatsoever to any of that and
look look at the movements that have
tried to take I mean 19th century
movements late 20th century movements
that have tried to replicate parts of it
identify the way you're familiar with
the Sea of Faith movement uh started in
the 1980s you know I mean to a great
extent I think certainly Jordan you and
I would have almost 100 agreement with
this with this movement that recognized
what nature had done recognize the the
existential position that we were in as
as Modern Man the late 20th century
these there used to be groups they used
to meet on a weekly basis there are some
I gather now but they've pretty much
dwindled away because they don't work
unless you have that revivifying Central
force and that's where Jonathan has his
great Advantage well and you and you
pointed in in the last uh in the last
bit of your commentary you pointed to
the fact you in your discussion with
Holland is that if these Collective
acts of worship and orientation towards
the good aren't rooted in the kind of
transcendent mystery that's outside the
domains of the political whatever that
means because we don't know what's
outside the realm of the Practical and
the political well the realm of the
mysterious and eternal and to the degree
when I go to Orthodox Christian
ceremonies I think I'm probably most at
home there
I would say because all of it's ancient
and all of its liturgical and Musical
and there's no propaganda
and it's such a relief you know when you
and I went to we went to David Byrne in
New York remember and that was pretty
good show and it got Transcendent
because Burn's quite the musician and
then right in the middle of it there was
a a piece devoted to woke propaganda and
it just blew the entire atmosphere and
you think well you have to be aiming at
something Transcendent and eternal and
and and that contains the infinite in
the finite and why wouldn't that be
incomprehensibly weird and isn't it
possible that the emphasis on
phenomena like the Virgin birth and the
death and the resurrection and the word
at the beginning of the time of time and
the sacrifice of the Lamb aren't all
part of that language that nails down
the
finite to the infinite a way that isn't
amenable to the mere disruption of
Reason like music isn't amenable to the
mere disruption of reason
it's got to be something like that
because look what we do in the
cathedrals they're stunningly beautiful
they take hundreds of years to build
they're full of Music they're full of
strange practices and Gothic symbolism
and death and it's very uncanny and
strange but it's not trivial I don't
think any of us think it's trivial
um I by the way your your mention of the
Orthodox
um
because there is there is always this
feeling particularly in Christianity
that The Closer you can get to the
beginning the more true it must be
um which is I think people sense that in
music certainly in in worship I suspect
that the small but significant rise in
tridentine Catholics in our day has
something to do with that you know
people when they are rediscovering for
instance Catholicism in our era a few of
my close friends have done it they don't
tend to go to the sort of weakest forms
of Catholicism they go to tridentine
Catholic mass
Latin Mass uh Catholicism and I think
that's totally understandable in the
same way that people would go to some of
the Orthodox uh um churches for that
because it seems to go back further and
the point with that is always you need
to get right back you tried to get right
back to the beginning and I know Jordan
you'll you'll know I can't remember if
you've been to the holy land yet but one
of the things that's so striking about
it of course is that if you go to I
don't know
um if you go to Nazareth or Nazareth is
not a good idea these days but I'd say
the late Galilee and and go to the spots
where Jesus is believed to have to have
called his disciples and there's a
church there and you you see the lapping
water on the shores you feel well I'm
I'm at the place where this whole thing
started
and that's worth thinking about and
that's worth dwelling upon well that's
an all that's a very old idea too that
that that's what a baptism is it's a
return to the cosmogonic chaos that
preceded existence and there is this
notion that's very well developed
mythologically that in order to revivify
ourselves in the face of the continual
catastrophe of life we have to return to
the origin and wash away all the stains
of life so that we can re-emerge and and
Forge forward and some of that's
dramatized in baptism and the cleansing
that's associated with that but that's
it's also the pattern for something like
confession and then expiation and
atonement and confession is nothing more
than a listing of those things about
yourself that you know you should shed
and get rid of in the desire to return
to something like a more pristine
original state and I think that state is
associated with childhood and play which
is there's an intimation in the New
Testament right that unless you become
as little children you cannot enter the
kingdom of heaven and that isn't
clearing away of all that traumatic
catastrophe that's associated with
maturation and a return to that playful
and joyful spirit that so delightfully
characterizes children unconscious
though they may be but I also I think
like in terms of the return to the
tridentine and the Orthodox there's
something more that's happening and it
has to do with our discussion to a
certain extent and it has to do with
something which changed in Christianity
during the time of the Enlightenment and
the reformation and the subsequent
centuries where Christianity did end up
being reduced to something like belief
in certain things that happened and was
reduced to a kind of materialism and
began to compete with science and
materialism in ways that ultimately
didn't didn't look right and so if you
look now back at the ancient
Christianity and you like you know I I
entered the Orthodox Faith because I
read the ancient Mystics and I read the
ancient Christians and I could read as
you know a 7th Century Saint and realize
that what they're talking about does not
in any way come compete with whatever
you know scientific theory someone
discovers or talks about and that that
is reflected in the very way that we
worship that we don't have an hour and a
half sermons and we don't have the same
type of moralization that you'll find in
modern churches but it is rather this
kind of cosmic dance this kind of cosmic
participation in this act of gratitude
and and yeah it really is a something
like a cosmic you were you were trained
as a modern artist and you returned to
the yeah okay so so how so that's a
return to the origin and you were
trained as a post-modernist as well when
you were an artist so what why did you
return to the source and what has that
done for you but it has to do with
something like what we're talking about
like post-modern art is has become a
kind of caricature where it is a comment
upon a comment and upon a comment it
almost gets reduced to propositions and
getting the joke and and this type of
inner language that is actually not
connected to reality anymore and so
looking back in time I realized that
wait a minute traditional Arts were Arts
of participation there were Arts of
celebration of One's Own World whether
you're it is your culture your tribe But
ultimately a celebration of God and I
realized if I want to make something
real something that isn't just some
strange comment upon something else
something ironic yeah something ironic
and satirical then the only way to
really get back to that is to engage in
liturgical art so by making things for
churches yeah so making things for
churches is possibly the realest thing
an artist can do because you're you're
making something that is beautiful that
is proportional and that is there to
enter into a community participate in
that community's existence but is also
made in the celebration of that which is
highest and so I think that that's the
highest form of art let me comment on
something Jonathan just said there's
something you said Jordan first the
issue of Modern Art I I I I I agree
completely I mean there is nothing so
disturbing as going through a museum
like MoMA or Tate modern I mean these
are effectively I think warehouses of
junk or future junk
um it is is so dispiriting to find a
total lack of craft a total lack of any
serious ambition the Kitsch the irony
the irony Without End and perhaps worst
of all a denigrated Netflix earlier let
me roll back a bit I don't know if
you've seen this recent Warhol
documentary on Netflix but it's the
absolute absolutely characterizes the
the problem that I'm sure you well I
think you you describe as having run
into as an artist working in modern art
which is that you see again and again
apart from the limitations of his own
imagination I don't say that lightly
warhol's problem is he roughly knows how
to ask questions and he sort of finds
his way towards the basic questions like
what are we doing here what survives of
us what's love
and the problem is he he gropes his way
towards his question sometimes quite
literally but he has absolutely no idea
of how to answer them I'm saying he's
like he becomes famous for raising
really quite banal questions
and having no answer to them and that
seems to me completely to be the
situation you describe with modern art
which itself describes something very
very dangerous in the culture which is
that it's a culture that knows how to
raise certain questions thinks it's
rather Brave to raise certain questions
but has no idea of how to answer them
and that brings me to what Jordan said
and about this about this and undoubted
revivifying that comes from the breaking
of nature as it were there's a there's a
there's a very and this is about then
remembering those facts in Acts of
communal worship which as I say is a
great advantage of organized religion
there's a there's a very moving
description by one of wittgenstein's
pupils of a tutorial with Wittgenstein
in Cambridge in the 1920s obviously
um I don't need to explain I thought the
significance of interesting to any of
our listeners but but one of the things
past people don't realize is that the
unbelievable magnetism of him as as a
teacher the sense that that his brain
could could do almost anything one of
his students once said I remember a book
I was reading about him uh that one day
in a tutorial of Wittgenstein said to
his student and he said he said take
this wall for instance if I walk through
it now
and the student said I thought
Wittgenstein was going to walk through
the wall
his his mind
the everything about it was so
extraordinarily powerful I thought he
was going to break nature
and of course that was enough to fuel
that student for the rest of their life
to be one of wittgenstein's students and
to have been near a brain that seemed
capable of breaking nature and then we
get back to that thing Jonathan which
you've raised which is maybe this idea
of a thing so strong that it breaks
nature is the thing you need
to revive and to run off and the thing
will not exhaust
well I think gentlemen it's hard for me
to imagine
a better place to close than that
um we we should do this again after
thinking about it for several months and
I I would like that very much
um I'd like to thank everybody who is
watching and listening and following and
hope that you'll all attend as these
ideas continue to develop over the next
while which we certainly hope they will
and so Jonathan do you have any closing
yeah that was pretty good it was pretty
good ending yeah well Douglas it's
always a pleasure to talk to you and
like the conversation had all the
qualities that I was hoping for and so
we'll keep hashing this out you know
we're getting somewhere with this as far
as I can tell and so hopefully everybody
listening and watching will find out as
useful and productive as we found it